welcome scalinatio so glad to have you
here um it's such a treat because um
i've been kind of checking out the ab
tech aboriginal territories in
cyberspace
because i'm a little bit of like a
second life history nerd and um you know
so it was just so much fun to you know
be in conversation with you before this
this festival i'm so glad you're here
today
thank you
it's wonderful to be here i heard you
already introduced me yes i did
i wanted i wanted to listen to your
pronunciation remember we went over that
oh yes and i'm glad you weren't i'm glad
you weren't there at the beginning
because i like
jumbled my words i was talking too fast
and had to go back but i got it
i got it i think
awesome
so i have a presentation i'm going to
share my screen
sorry i'm new to this platform so i'm
just it's taking a second for some
reason i don't know what's oh
there we go i just wasn't clicking right
so you have to see the whole inner
workings not the nice presentation but
everyone here can deal with that i think
we like the messy edges nothing ever we
don't need to put everything in a nice
clean white box here at gray area
festival
yeah i mean even for that and that mo i
should even have my anyway i have my so
first i usually say sego guego what's
going on to you jets hi everyone my name
is scalanati and i would like to say
thank you to you wade for inviting me to
be part of the gray area festival and
the show diorama
i also want to thank sami whose last
name i did not take the time to find out
i'm sorry but jamie healer that's sammy
vealer everybody
sammy uh installed all the work uh and
so i really appreciate that and the work
that they did with me
so yeah we'll go off for that
and i also like to say um when i'm in a
room with people or if i can see them
but i know you're there somewhere
that i acknowledge
and address
the original inhabitants of the
territories we are all joining in from
and i want to say to you that your
existence is resistance i know to
i greet you and i'm happy that you are
here with me
i am world builder
this is the title of my talk and i'm
going to be telling you today about uh
creating the indigenous future on aptek
island and turtle island which for those
of you who don't already know wherever
you've been turtle island is what most
people call north america these days and
you want to know something i think
turtle island is the entire world and i
will tell you why
in this presentation
so perhaps wade mentioned ab tech well
he mentioned while i was already on
um aboriginal territories in cyberspace
is a research creation network that i
co-founded with my partner and husband
now
jason edward lewis
uh and our goal is was is and was to
ensure that indigenous people basically
showed up in cyberspace we wanted to
make sure that we were
using these tools these brand new tools
this is like you know
we've
yeah i'm talking more about that too
but i want to keep it quick
so
one of our major projects is called the
initiative for indigenous futures
so with aboriginal territories in
cyberspace we're really talking about
indigenous people using new technologies
but we realized that the new technology
could be seen as a metaphor for the
future just aboriginal people indigenous
people being in the future and by the
way i use indigenous
aboriginal first nations native american
way and all the other ones indian
uh interchangeably pretty much
okay
this is my avatar xox and a piece i call
she's dancing with herself
uh she's a second life avatar i love her
um and i wanted to tell you that i
haven't i didn't always look this good
back in the day
there was the palace
and if i was with you i would ask for a
show of hands of who remembers the
palace wade
any memory or knowledge of the palace
yeah awesome
and some
back then our you know the default
avatar and for the most part most
people's avatars was just the smiley
face this had this smiley face and you
know we felt very
lucky that we could change the you know
eyes to x's or a sad face or whatever
and then eventually we could put little
hats on our avatars and eventually we
could totally customize them
but all that was to just say i i've been
around i've been around
the
virtual worlds for a while now
and i started world building if you will
in 1996 when i conceived of cyberpowwow
which is a project i did as part of a
collective a first nations artist
collective called nation to nation
and this project itself merits
a hour-long presentation pretty much so
i won't talk about it too much but i
just wanted to
give you a tiny show about what it
looked like and what kind of worlds we
were making but the idea was again that
indigenous people this was called i call
you know the tagline was an aboriginal
territory in cyberspace and this was one
of the first forays into that new
territory that myself and other artists
entered into and there on the screen can
you see my cursor
xox i've always been xox and there she
is there i am
dressed as tank girl dressed as an
indian i love it
so
i think everyone in this crowd probably
knows what the word machinima means but
i leave the slide in there so i can let
you know that i make machinima
exclusively in second life
and that the work in the show diorama
i'm calling a slice of sky world and
it's based on a set i made with my team
from abc
for the movie the machinima she falls
for ages
so what i thought i would do is just
run through what she falls for ages
looks like it is about i'm not going to
play the video because um
i was thinking this was zoom and zoom
always massacres my videos so um i
thought i would just show you still
images
of she falls for ages but i do have a
little tiny one minute video that we're
going to try looking at later which i
hear in the technical uh run-through it
looks pretty good so i'm hoping
so
um
let me just skip this slide here
oh i love that illustration of the
engine
tree yeah that's really nice
it is by erica perro she's on she was a
former graphic designer on our team
and i love it too i i just love it and
you'll see
you i show this on purpose because i
loved it so much that i it went it went
places but first i'll tell you the story
if she falls for ages
she falls for ages as a sci-fi retelling
of the hadena
creation story
in that story
it you know
traditionally maybe i should go back
here traditionally the story takes place
you know it's it always takes place in
sky world
you know a place beyond the heavens it
always has a tree
as a special tree that is uprooted
and the hole left behind
is
there's a well there's always a pregnant
woman and the pregnant woman falls or
you know
otherwise goes through the hole okay and
lands on an earth still covered in water
and the animals that are there already
help her to create the earth as we know
it
so what i wanted to do um is i wanted to
and the story when i've heard it before
is traditionally told like you know sky
world is basically
pre-contact iroquois like houses are all
longhouses made of bark and trees you
know that the people wear bunk skin
clothing or whatever
hide you know skin animal skin clothing
and uh you know they use clay pots all
that stuff
i thought you know if it's beyond the
sky maybe it's another planet and
wouldn't it be awesome
wouldn't it be awesome if they were like
this technologically advanced people and
they were like these wonderful
you know peaceful people
who
live sustainably and
and have you know figured out how to
have technology and and be in harmony
with their planet
so um that's what i did that's what i
did i i
created this world
sky world my sky world
and here's the celestial tree and i
consult um a consult
you know elders
knowledge keepers and books
to um to get my to do my research to
base my story and so the tree in one of
the older one of the older versions
there's many versions of this story but
in one of them it says the blossom it's
blossoms light the world
and so this is why i made this tree with
the glowing blossoms but i also decided
that this tree was actually cultivated
by the people of sky world over
thousands of years
and that they were brilliant botanists
and they figured out how to make a
luminescent tree that could light that
could be there an energy basically an
energy producing tree that could that's
that's their source of energy on the
planet
so in the story
i do a little bit of backstory we see
sky woman the pregnant woman who will
later be going through the hole as a
child with her family and this is also
based on i didn't make any of this up
like they're supposed to have like
special powers so i made her a telepath
and italic and her brother's a
telekinetic
and they're secluded from birth until
they finally are summoned by the
guardian of the celestial tree oh this
is this is cut off a little bit
okay here we go
to a dream guessing feast
and
um when she goes there i add you know
they fall in love i mean they do get in
the old stories they get married but no
one ever talks about love in fact in
some of the stories most a very popular
version of the story he's this tyrant
and he actually pushes her through the
hole and i was like that's another big
change that i wanted to make to the
story i was like you know
i don't want you know
i want i don't want to see
her as a victim skyrim as a victim and i
don't want to see sky woman as a
clumsy person because another story she
just like falls through this big hole
i wanted to see us choosing
to jump
and to be
basically
the seed of the new world
um
anyway
i don't have to tell you this part so
she lands on this earth covered in water
onto this turtle
and like the story these water animals
the beaver otter
and uh muskrat are there to help her uh
are
you know and they
so they go and they get some earth for
her and bring it to her and in
combination with some of the seeds she's
brought from her world and the dance and
ritual
she dances on the back of the turtle
that begins to grow and grow and grow
until it becomes as they say turtle
island
and this is why i think turtle island
must be pangaea
the original super continent
and not just north america so and it's
not just me who thinks that i've heard
it from other people as well but very
popularly you're going to hear it's just
turtle it's just north america
so uh
so this is the this is where the sky
world what you're seeing in diorama
is the celestial tree
uh and then it's surrounded by
these canisters or vats i never we never
named them when we made them actually
but you see inside of them
the
the blossom
rotating as though it was being formed
in a lab
and
i tried to also the if you saw the
picture of sky world the atmosphere
uh is pink which you don't see very well
but you can see here a little bit that
the sky's actually pink
um and another little detail about
sky world is i wanted it's not explicit
but i wanted to make it
how do you say
post or pre or
other than race no race
and by that and the way i did that is
that i i made the people these six
different bright colors that
no matter how you mix like and basically
so here's a mom and her two kids
no matter what color person
she made it with to produce these
children there's no mixing of any colors
that would come out pink so that's what
i want to do is like imagine like the
the offspring of these unions
were not based on the color of the
parents
anyway so it's very based on skin color
is what i was trying to think about a
little bit too
and so i'm telling you all this because
oh wait one more slide uh she you know
she finally
she ends with
the first one of the first foods on
planet earth supposedly is was the
sunflower
[Music]
uh and so
you can watch the actual video which is
20 minutes long on scavenging.com
and then i wanted to show you
a prequel that i made i was asked to
make a very short video like a one
minute video with no
uh dialogue
and so i imagined
that uh so in the world i i think i
forgot to say that um
in the story the their planet is dying
sky world is actually dying that's why
she has to go through
through the you know to the other world
to her and start again there's you know
but um
and so it ends you know that's how the
story and my story ends but then i
thought what if they figured out a way
they're so bright maybe they figured out
a way to save the planet and ever since
then
they have been looking for sky woman and
her descendants and so this is uh this
is what
happens
okay
when they find her now i've gotta
unshare
and reshare
so i can do this properly
oh i'm so excited
just one minute i hope i don't
disappoint you
it's very simple
but i love it too
okay
i think it should work
[Music]
do
so
[Music]
youtube
and i'll do the uh i'll do the
reshare
thingy
so i got a few more slides
that was wonderful and i love that in
the credits you have the you have the
exact second like location tag marked um
that was cute
yeah we yeah i think it's yeah thanks
i'm glad you think that
so world building
one of the things that um world building
as it were and i think the way we've
been talking about it wade you know
making these worlds in cyberspace
uh you know i've been doing it as a i
used to i was thinking of it as play a
lot of the time kind of like barbie play
you know dollhouses and that kind of
thing
but slowly very slowly over these last
25 years
i started to realize that what we do in
cyberspace can affect the real world
and more so that the stuff i'm making in
cyberspace are starting to have
expressions
in the afk away from keyboard world
and so
one of the things um that i made i was
asked to do a public art sculpture very
happy it's commissioned by um curator
sharon
from uh
dc
uh sorry no it's now it's called uh
found fly foundation here in montreal to
do a piece uh
on the street
and uh i i did a a street sign of the
celestial tree so this is made to be
like it's exactly the same diameter
the post is the same diameter as a stop
sign here in montreal and the colored uh
decals that i've put on are the same
stuff that a stop sign is made out of
and so i imagine like what could it be
like to have the celestial tree as a
signage in our world what would that
mean and how would it feel and so it was
very exciting for me to to make that in
real life this is something unfortunate
i didn't have a good screen shot of this
item which is in the movie she falls for
ages but uh it was just a it's just
another example of something that was
hanging it was hanging in as decoration
and it's of course referencing our
wampum belts uh iroquois wampum belts
but a circular format which usually
for linear horizontal
[Music]
and then i did a cosplay
of
sky woman
[Laughter]
with my amazing team we made this
costume which consists of the gown
including um this big color that we were
able to embroider using a special tajima
machine
you know one of the women on the team
fixed the hair we bought a white wig and
we bought these little thingies and
she's like spray painted
i don't even know what she did it was so
amazing
um we made a we made a 3d we 3d modeled
the necklace that she wears in the show
and uh yeah and so it's just like and
now this piece this the dress and all
that except so without me she i bought a
pink pregnant mannequin
and they are on display in holland
the netherlands yes
so yeah it's very exciting and i think
that that's um that's one of the things
that uh i think of now as building is
like actually affecting this world
so how are we doing for time because i
added some extra slides just in case but
i
i can stop now too we're okay on time if
you want to keep going go for it we got
about ten more minutes okay
so this project is is called skins and i
want to explain that
aboriginal territories in cyberspace
does a bunch of things besides helping
me make my art
um we also run this program called skins
which is a series of workshops to teach
indigenous youth how to make machinima
or video games or a range of other um
basically had it but not just how to
make the things but
how to use our how to tell our stories
and use our stories in these new
technologies
um and so
we've made oh there's me this is many
moons ago when i had like long dark hair
teaching the youth how to do it i love
that picture so i keep it in there but
we've made
it these youth that we've met in these
workshops we've made a number of um
a number of machinimas so this is one
that's called the modem from the native
youth program in my in uh at the museum
of anthropology in ubc
and same program focus i'm sorry i
haven't i don't have the the sizes right
there here go
and then more recently we made oh i
forgot one anyway how the loon got its
walk anyway these are just a tiny
sampling of of some of the machinimas
and some of the projects i wanted to
tell you that we do that and i want to
explain to you that it's partly because
of that
um and of course my making machinima is
that we you know we have an island in
second life we have you know we we never
tire of being amused by the idea that
real indians pay real money for virtual
land but we do
every six months
and um
what we've done there
in addition to
hosting some workshops and
having my machinima sets
is we've created a place where people
can hang out
and um and come in like so you know we
want to invite the students but really
anyone uh the participants of the
workshops i should say we want to invite
them to come back to be in relationship
with us and to keep learning their
skills to keep you know whatever so
we're like you can come to second life
and you you know we'll show you how to
how to whatever further customize your
avatar or how to build something or
import something
um but uh we weren't getting a lot of
people coming so what we started to do
is we actually have a time once a week
where ab tech staff
are on in world so that they can you
know really um
really
there's just a special you know one
specific time so we don't have to like
worry about catching someone or making
appointments and so i wanted to invite
everyone here to come visit us on
wednesday afternoons eastern standard
time at 1 30 if they would like to have
a tour of the island or if they would
like help with their avatars you know
the friendly folks there will uh will
answer your questions and hang out with
you if you like or leave you alone if
you prefer that
but uh that's also um in the show
diorama that is uh where
you are linked to so you can go um from
the lobby and my canister in the lobby
to the room with the tree and the more
canisters um my personal room and then
from there you can go on to appjack
island
and see that
and one last thing oh no there's two
more slides here
we've got i just wanted to give you a
real life view of my avatar
top and an ab tech staff member all the
attic staff members wear the uniform so
you can recognize them and their first
name is abby
we were talking to this scary avatar
named alma and they were very interested
in talking about the significance of of
digital artifacts
in world so it was a pretty high level
conversation which we're we're also up
for but we also can just hang out
and most recently i'm very excited i
don't have lots of slides to show you
but we opened during covid and because
of kovid we opened a gallery
and so we've already had like four or
even five shows uh and it's really
exciting uh this show a thread that
never breaks
was meant to be a real life show of
textiles indigenous textile artists in
toronto
um and you know i know the curators and
they contact me and said look you know
we don't know what to do we really want
to have this show
but we can't you can't do it anymore do
you have any ideas you know you don't
think we really want a web page
like they had some idea that i did
something in virtual worlds but they
weren't really sure what that even meant
you know and so i when i showed them
this they were like yes we want to do
this and so we transmediated all these
textile works and and they're in the
show and we have a website which i'm
sorry i don't actually i believe you go
to indigenous futures it's hard to find
sorry
but i'll you know eventually i'll get
that into this presentation
tune in next time for more information
and
[Music]
now that's the end of my i i can you
know i can just talk and talk and i
didn't set my timer so i don't know
where we're at well don't worry because
i can talk and talk to and i have so
many i have like hundreds and thousands
of questions for you um
based on this but before i get to answer
my ask my questions i want to ask a
question that came from the audience um
great auto art machine asks how do you
see the relationship between the vr
worlds of the 90s and early 2000s and
the contemporary resurgence and i
actually had this question too because
like second life
really had a peak heyday you know
between i think it was like 2006 to 2008
it was like heyday and second life um
and since then you know we discussed
before there's like a or no i was
talking i forget who told me this but
there's something like 30 000 or 300 000
like static users who are like still on
the platform and like but it really
hasn't had any major like growth or drop
off from that static number since like
2011 or something so yeah i'm very
curious about you know how you feel you
know using this platform that um
is quite singular in that way
well uh so i think
so aside from second life which i'll
talk about in a second in case the the
questioner was asking about in general
you know um at the time that i jumped on
the bandwagon um it wasn't a very big
bandwagon but it was yeah people were
seriously talking about
like it was like
this
the palace was like
insanely
cutting edge it was it was like it was
like the future
okay i mean to to be able to see one
another even though i mean now look what
we're doing this is every day we're so
used to this and so nothing but i mean
just to see a representation of
ourselves even though it was a happy
face
you know via our computers like that
was astounding and the thought that we
could customize that area was also
astounding and at that time i don't know
the age the astr you know what i
understood to be going on was that the
internet was going to come and it was
going to make our lives better it was
going to be an information sharing
platform which it is it is but you know
it was it was going to somehow
not be what it is today
it was not going to
be a place where we would be we would
become the consumed
you know in fact i mean i thought we
were gonna we were gonna bypass
consumerism altogether with this
internet thing right back then but
instead what has happened is we did not
know how to you know
leave behind capitalism and consumerism
and in fact what's happened is now our
privacy is threatened our lives our data
is mined you know and and so that's what
i see the difference as the difference
between late 90s and now uh in the
internet and and and i'm honestly
not sure how much longer i'm going to
stay
i mean
i know and so back to second life um
love second life as soon as i saw it
because
now i have a whole body i have boobs
like i mean come on it's great you know
but
um and and that you know second life
disappointed me too i think
you know i think they
i think they might have been going in
the wrong anyway they were going in i
think they were going one direction at
first and then i think i believe what
happened is they
found you know a lot of their users were
i don't know let me put it this way
here i am
being in second life making this first
machinima that i made time traveler tian
now i i bet a lot of you listeners know
the novel snow crash by neil stephenson
and snow crash talks about the metaverse
and a lot of people say that the creator
of second life read snow crash and said
i'm gonna make that
and made second life and so in that book
okay
they talk about how the metaverse was
good but only got really good only
became like the platform where everyone
actually did business and had
relationships and lived
when facial expressions
were perfected
okay
so now here i am in second life and i'm
making these machinimas and i have to
contend with
nine facial expressions only which are
like these grimaces or like very
exaggerated looks right
and they keep every time i log in they
say coming soon an incredible feature
coming soon big wonderful thing and i'm
like i'm saying to my team oh my god
it's going to be facial expressions i
can't wait i can't wait
finally the day arrives
and what is the new feature
boob jiggle
and
that i almost left that day i i was so
disappointed i was terribly disappointed
anyway i didn't leave
you know it's like a marriage
i'm married to second life
and until second life dies i'm only
gonna be with second life i'm not gonna
do another i'm not gonna it i put in so
much energy into into learning and
molding second life into my desired
imagery that i'm not like
i'm not leaving
but um
you know and i'm not either i run out of
machinima ideas or second life stops
being that's that's how it'll that's how
it's gonna go and then i think i might
you know yeah then i'll just start
making more stuff in the in you know the
so-called real world which i am loving
the i put this book nearby so i could
talk about afk
as in yeah away from keyboard world
because it is real of course we're in
the real world when we're in the virtual
world
it's just another part of it it's just
an extension i'm so glad you said that
because that is like this is like oh my
gosh nobody ever says that and i have
this like like that is like i i um
one of my favorite scholars is uh tom
belstorf who's an anthropologist of
second life um and he wrote um an
ethnography of second life and he was
studying the different communities and
how it worked and bringing doing this
really you know fabulous anthropological
survey also of the tech company as well
that was part of it like lyndon labs was
you know you know he was doing the
online and the offline it was this
really holistic study and that's kind of
the first thing he says in his book is
that you know the virtual is not
reducible to the real the virtual is
reducible to the actual and i think
that's like a dynamic that we have to
really consider particularly in thinking
about worlding because what you do
online is not like not unreal you know
we may create renders in something
called unreal engine but you know that
it's not it isn't unreal it just seems
unreal you know what you do in a virtual
world affects the person on the other
side of the computer just the same as if
i'm you know what's happening we're
having a conversation you know um and
this it's all virtual
um
and
you know i i've been you know in
thinking you know that
that description of the metaverse and
snow crash you know always you know
really resonated with me as well you
know that was something that i've always
been looking for and i study virtual
worlds and i research virtual worlds and
that's kind of my my personal interest
and background
and
you know when i first stumbled upon vr
chat for the first time
it gave me that same feeling i think
that you described going into second
life i was like oh my god i can embody
myself as any avatar i want you
literally like it's so physicalized you
literally walk through portals and res
up in a new world and i was like this is
it i was like and because you know
second life has a voice as well but the
way that like you know and speaking of
the facial expressions on you know and a
lot of you are things that will get your
it'll your avatar will be programmed for
the mouse the mouth to move when you're
talking and it just feels so rich and
embodied um but i've been on vr chat
it's still in this this game has been a
beta phase for like five years now
um it's has a pr it has a somewhat
stagnant user base
it you know the same worlds are being
promoted all the time and like you can
go and you can search and you can find
things because the cool thing about it
is anybody can
who anybody working in unity can upload
their files to it like it's totally
unity compatible and that's like a
really accessible thing for a lot of
young artists and so i see this really
democratic potential to create whatever
you want and it's totally free it's uh
you know on the you know second life you
have to purchase
land but in vr chat it's a free-for-all
well you don't have to purchase land you
don't you don't actually i mean it makes
your life much easier it's just like
being a painter you can go paint on
plein air or you can have a studio oh
right of course that's true that's true
i didn't think about it that way that's
totally true um
but no i think that you know i i would
like you know one day i'm gonna have to
like tempt you to do a little bit of
tourism and come visit and i'll take you
on a little trip there someday um maybe
it'll change your mind about just
staying in second life um
um
but no i i i love the commitment and i
love how beautiful the community is in
ab tech um
you know the the programming is so rich
and it's such an amazing opportunity for
people all over the world to connect
with each other you know across time and
difference in language and all different
other sorts of things
um
you know
i wanted to ask you um you know about
what you're working on right now i'm in
any kind of current particular interest
i know you we just heard this amazing
rich mythology about sky worlds and
about she falls for ages um but i'm
wondering what kind of stories you you
know you still have that you want to
tell and you haven't been able to yet
i'm so glad you asked
i'm so excited about my current project
so you met my avatar xox i told you
about her well she's showing up more and
more in my machinimas and xox um
is gonna meet the queen
and so one of the real thing i can't
show you a picture i don't have a
picture prepared
a real item that i made remember talking
about wampum balance i think you know a
lot of people don't know what they are
but they're something i'm trying to find
a picture or a thing right now but i
can't
anyway
imagine long
tubular beads
all sort of strung together i'm actually
here i'm making one
this is this is the beginning of one
so this is the loom
these are
these are um i have a long ah
anyway
so it would go this way
yikes
it would be seen across and
these this little line of stuff right
here
is um
are the beads and they'll be full it'll
be a full
you know imagery
and uh
what so
i mean i sort of started i should sure i
should have started with the story but
anyway i'll start with the punch line so
this is the this is the whopping belt
that i'm going to be making
now this is my avatar in case you
couldn't tell
i hope you can and this is the queen
queen elizabeth
and what they have here
uh is a
famous wampum belt so there's a wampum
inside the wampum which makes me very
excited
it's like diorama it's like exactly
exactly
so uh this is this is one just this is
one sketch you know i made a few i've
made a number of sketches but um
so the story
yeah i'm like so
god i don't know where to begin it'll
take me 20 minutes to tell you the whole
thing so i can't tell you everything but
basically
xox is gonna visit the queen she's gonna
tell the queen
dude
you do not get to wash your hands of the
mess you made
in north america
all right and you're still one of the
richest people in the world so you're
going to put some money
towards fixing this problem at the very
least and she's she's going to make a
suggestion she's going to be nice and
she's going to be polite
but she's going to be very clear you
know you can put money towards language
revitalization because that is there i
i've been taking my language classes of
my mother's mother tongue
and you know i see the incredible work
that people are doing
everyone's doing to revitalize the
language and and the lack of curriculum
and how money
money can help people to learn like
it is needed to create curriculum to
hire people to hire people just to learn
the language to hire people to go to
school
you know
and to develop to develop protocols for
translation and to translate texts into
ganges and to translate old gonangeha
into english you know there's so much
work to be done and that takes money and
she's got some so i think it's time
so that's what is gonna happen
uh that's what i'm working on now and so
i'm i have a show and there's so much
more to tell you about
but i i think it'll take a lot of time
so
i just i worry about taking up too much
time you know no never um no we're so no
this is so wonderful um you know because
and i think that i love
your use of the i love your use of
machinima as your tool as your tool for
this um and i'm wondering what about
this particular medium
is what about this particular medium
speaks to you and what about this
particular medium this mode of
filmmaking um
connects to the ideas that you're trying
to get across through through machinima
yeah thanks thanks for asking that
there's two things so i think what it is
is first of all
like i
watch
like many we watch films
you know and when i have like i i have a
limited i have an idea of how a film is
made it takes so much people so many
people so much money so many resources
um you know when i made time traveler tm
the main character wears a jet pack and
flies around and i was like i was i had
written that story way before i met
second life
and so you know i'm wondering like how
am i going to do this this is going to
be an animation a 3d animation you know
i knew i wanted to look kind of like a
video game then someone shows me second
life and i'm like you can fly
you know it was just so obvious it was i
felt like i could do it by myself i
could you can just oh you can almost
make a machinima by yourself i i can't
don't i can't i have help i have amazing
amazing help people that i are precious
to me especially
shirley
exactly i gotta say nancy because this
person this woman has just
found
like she just knows how to troubleshoot
you know every like she's figured out so
many she could write a manual for people
but i won't but she won't because i need
her to work with me not writing a manual
for anybody
but it's just so great so anyhow that
that's one thing okay that's that's one
of the things it there's a diy aspect to
it there's a there's a
i remember i was in the palace
i would remember i was in the palace i
remember i played with barbies and still
do so when i saw when i met second life
i was like it's the palace with it's
barbie and the palace together it's
their child so i was just you know it
just was very it was not like a movie
a live-action movie to me which seemed i
didn't even know how to begin it was
like oh all i have to do is figure out
how to use a camera
how to capture the screen i mean
it was very hard it took seven years to
make
to make like the first episode is that
that can't be true two years anyway it
took forever to make time traveler tm
seven years for the whole thing
and uh
yeah
what a journey to like in learning this
medium and figuring it out and like you
know we've been talking a lot today
about um how we can use technology to
reclaim our agency particularly in
situations where it seems like we may
not have agency where there's some sort
of protocol whether it be algorithmic or
software you know however whichever way
um and it just
it it feels very it feels like a really
the liberatory potential feels really
rich um and i mean it seemed to be so
for for you
yeah and the other thing that i was
going to say about second life and why
it speaks to me is because i i mentioned
it earlier it felt like the future
right and so i mean actually the so did
the palace but like
to me
using sec light second life is
the medium is the message like i want to
show indigenous people thriving in the
future and what better medium to show us
in one where we can fly
and teleport and you know just be and be
fabulous you know as fabulous as we want
to be so yeah it's it's really it was
the right fit for me for for a long time
like i don't think of myself as a
machinima artist i don't think of myself
as a new media artist i think of myself
as an artist who uses the right you know
hopefully the right medium for the
message you know it's just i've not i've
not gotten tired of this i feel like i
still have stuff to say with with this
particular medium
that's so exciting and i'm so excited to
hear what all the things you have to say
through those works as they kind of come
out over in the next couple years um
you know just to you know we're running
a little bit out of time but i wanted to
you know just to connect back to some of
the ideas that we've been talking about
you know this weekend um you know we we
heard from lodging mcmillan earlier
today who shared the black movement
library where she's archiving um black
dance and choreography we also heard
from am dark who's working on an open
source afro-hair 3d library um
and you know there's a lot of you know
i'm wondering how you tackle the role of
representation and appropriation in
virtual spaces you know i think that
it's like so important that indigenous
people have agency in these spaces and
are able to represent themselves but i
also understand you know i just you know
this i was on steam the other day and
this game came up that was just like
it's you know you put you it's it's me
it's marketed towards you know kind of
like white gamer guys and it's your play
a native american person in it and i
just was seeing this and i was like huh
this is icky and i wanted to ask you
about this like how do we deal with you
know these issues of like identity
tourism or
appropriation of indigenous culture and
virtual worlds and you know how do you
how do you navigate that
well it's been a problem since like it's
been a question
since the very beginning like since
since cyber powwow right
at that time people were like
how are you gonna know who's really
indigenous
you know we're just wearing these happy
faces
and i was like
i don't know can we just try this let's
just try this before we just say like
we're not gonna do it because we might
not know who's wearing the you know the
avatar
and what happened was we got in there
and like everyone's like hello you know
it's all
typing right hello hello
where are you from
winnipeg
where you from
toronto or whatever you know and they're
and like slowly they're like wait a
second i know you i know we already knew
each other like it was like people who
already knew each other or they knew
they you know there was like less than
six degrees of separation they were able
to identify one another and feel very
comfortable and feel like they were in
an indigenous space
um
you know what i think about the how i
navigate the problem is
i
i i feel
again i feel i've gone through a
trajectory so i don't want to dismiss
this concern because it is one
but for myself
i think that
the problem does not come with digital
anything the problem exists anyway
white people pretend to be indians
real people
real afk whatever you want to call them
you know
and it's a problem
and it's a it's a really weird problem
and it's a heartbreaking problem in some
in some point aspects like there's
people who've done it and
they thought they
they thought they were indigenous it
seems
like it's messed up because they it
shows how little they know about
indigeneity to say that they're
indigenous to say that they have one
great great great great great great
grandmother whose indigenous so their
indigenous it's like whoa
because you know
it's a it's a tough one it's a tough one
it's a big can of worms to be opening at
the end of the talk you know
because
we lost so many people
you know we lost some people through
like
assimilation of course but like through
um legislation
that called the children of indigenous
people you know not indigenous
and i i i can go into more specifics but
i won't but please know audience that i
know there's more to it i'm saying i'm
just trying to say it a bit simply for
time purposes you know and so sometimes
i think like oh god well in specifically
in a piece i i'm imagining indians in
the 21st century a piece i made in 2001
i thought
imagine that had been switched
imagine all children
who were
you know children of of uh indigenous
people were just indigenous not half
indigenous or a quarter or 16th but just
indigenous imagine this place
would be full of indigenous people
and they would know who they were
and they would know
what why we're so
proud of being indigenous and why we
we continue to resist assimilation we
still continue it today
you know
so
i don't um
[Music]
i don't worry
if that's the right word i don't i don't
worry about
uh red face i feel like we need to
there's not i don't i in my practice do
not need to
um take steps to make it stop happening
you know i think in the world
institutions need to take steps and
figure out they're all figuring it they
are trying to figure it out right now
these things are happening right now you
know they need to figure out how to
not hire white people with money
earmarked for indigenous people
absolutely absolutely that's period um
you know um
just to end on a lighter note you know i
thought that was really important to
acknowledge and to to think through but
you know before we we close but i do
have one final question for you on a
more positive note um
what kind of cyberspace do you want to
see
and how do you envision the future of
what cyberspace could look and could
feel like
i love that question
i mean
you know in my mind it's very close to
what we see in second life and maybe it
is your vr chat that you're talking
about what i think second life or sorry
the virtual world that the cyberspace
that i want to see
what it would look like is that people
could have the bodies that they want
right
everything about that you know the hair
eyes gender skin color
clothing you know
they could have what they they could
just present themselves in the way that
they want to be presented and so that i
see hap you know happening we're really
close like i said in second life but
like i like i said
you know unfortunately i feel that
there's there's still some things that
i'm getting at but you know like your
hands
you know classic avatars can only have
hands that are like in three positions
and things like that
i mean
yeah i mean that's like that's you know
that's the look of it i mean
the cyberspace i want does not mine our
our data and does not infringe on our
privacy the cyberspace i want mirrors
the world that i want which is like i
and i i truly believe we can achieve
this but i just don't know when
but you know i think we had it before on
this continent we did have a a
non-consumerist way of living in a
sustainable way of living and i think it
can happen again and so to find a way
that cyberspace can do that to find a
way that the world can do that is is
what i'm is what i'm hoping will happen
in the future
sooner rather than later
absolutely what a beautiful vision and
you know i'm totally with you on on all
of it um scotlandi thank you so much for
being here this is so fun
um i you know i'm definitely going to be
having a little machinima movie marathon
tonight um
you know not that i've not seen them all
before i have
you're wonderful you're a wonderful
interlocutor if i'm saying that right
but i really appreciate you thank you so
much for inviting me
yeah absolutely and please everyone go
to abtech.org
um you can check out aboriginal
characters in cyberspace there's
beautiful instructions on the website
for how to get into second life um you
can also enter via the new art city
exhibition at www.newart.city
um and i you know i hope that you will
continue you know we were talking
earlier with am dark and her kind of you
know she said you know point blank give
money to black people you know please
give money to indigenous people support
indigenous communities support projects
like scalinatis this is how you can make
a difference and provide access to all
of these different technologies and
stories that are clearly so rich and
necessary as we reimagine what our world
might look like so thank you so much go
on eddie
yeah we'll go away